Relay service architecture reference (#60364)
gravitational/teleport: docs/pages/reference/architecture/relay.mdx

</Admonition>

## How it works

A Relay service deployment consists of one or more Relay instances configured with the same Relay group name, reachable by Teleport agents and clients through a L4 network load balancer. Relay instances of the same group receive connections from agents and clients through the load balancer, and can connect to each other directly. Relay instances listen on two separate ports to serve connections from agents and clients, and a third listening port is used for direct connections from other Relay instances in the same group.

The typical setup uses a load balancer serving the two ports, reachable at a single hostname, with port 3042 used by agents and port 443 used by clients. However, it's possible to use different load balancers and hostnames for the client and agent ports if necessary. The listening port for connectivity between Relay instances does not make use of the load balancer, since each Relay instance might require connecting to specific other instances to serve connections; as such, the Relay service requires outbound connectivity from each Relay instance to its peers on that port.

> The connections from the client to the Relay, the connections between Relay instances, and the tunnel connections from the Teleport agents and the Relay instances are all encrypted and authenticated through mutual TLS, with X.509 certificates issued by the Teleport control plane. The tunnel connections from agents to the Relay service and the connections between Relay instances use a bespoke protocol, the Relay configuration discovery from agents and the SSH connections from clients use gRPC. The use of external TLS termination is not supported.

Reviewer: > The tunnel connections from agents to the Relay service and the connections between Relay instances use a bespoke protocol, the Relay configuration discovery from agents and the SSH connections from clients use gRPC. 

Do you think we should go into this level of detail here? Is this something that customers will care about or would this be something that only needs to be known internally?

---
title: Teleport Relay Service
description: Architecture of Teleport's relay service
tags:
 - conceptual
 - platform-wide
---

<Admonition type="info">

All Teleport Relay service functionality is available starting from Teleport 18.3.0 for the SSH protocol. Other protocols are not supported at this time.

</Admonition>

> The Relay service is an optional Teleport cluster component that can be used to provide an alternate connectivity path between clients and resources similarly to what the Proxy service does when forwarding connections to resources [through reverse tunnels](proxy.mdx#tunnels): Teleport agents can be configured to open tunnels to both the Teleport Proxy service and to the Relay service, and clients can be configured to use the Relay service when connecting to resources; the Relay service will then route and forward the connection between the client and the requested resource without passing the connection through the Proxy service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Relay service is an optional component of a Teleport cluster that provides an alternative connectivity path between clients and resources. Similar to the Proxy service, it forwards connections to resources [through reverse tunnels](proxy.mdx#tunnels). However, unlike the Proxy service, the Relay service does not route connections through the Teleport control plane. Instead, it allows Teleport agents to open tunnels directly to the Relay service, enabling clients to connect to resources with lower latency and higher efficiency in specific network scenarios.
```

/nit

Reworded to hopefully make the a reader better understand at a glance the diff between Proxy vs Relay

</Admonition>

## How it works

A Relay service deployment consists of one or more Relay instances configured with the same Relay group name, reachable by Teleport agents and clients through a L4 network load balancer. Relay instances of the same group receive connections from agents and clients through the load balancer, and can connect to each other directly. Relay instances listen on two separate ports to serve connections from agents and clients, and it's possible to use different load balancers and hostnames if necessary. The typical setup uses a single load balancer serving the two ports, reachable at a single hostname, with port 3042 used by agents and port 443 used by clients.

An agent can be configured to use a given Relay by adding the address of the load balancer to its `teleport.yaml` configuration file:

```yaml
teleport:
  proxy_server: proxy.example.com:443
  relay_server: relay.example.com:3042
```

Agents running the SSH service that are also connected to a Proxy (i.e. they're running in "tunnel mode") will also open tunnels to the Relay service. The address specified in the configuration should resolve to the load balancer for the port used by agents.

> When an agent is configured to open tunnels to a given Relay group, it will periodically check the Relay configuration advertised by the Relay instances, then open enough tunnel connections to distinct Relay instances as determined by the Relay group configuration. The target connection count in the configuration should be not bigger than the amount of active and reachable Relay instances in the group at any given time, or all agents configured to use the group will keep connecting to the load balancer to reach for distinct instances that are not actually available.

Reviewer: This section references a number of Relay configuration options that have not yet been introduced. Do you think it would be worthwhile to include an example Relay configuration with high level explanation of the fields before diving into this section? Or linking to the reference section for the Relay service?

## Client configuration

Use of the Relay service requires a desktop client (i.e. `tsh`) or the . It's not possible to use a Relay through the Teleport web UI.

> When using `tsh`, it's possible to specify the `--relay` option (or the `TELEPORT_RELAY` environment variable) with the hostname and port of the load balancer for the port used by clients; if a port is not specified, the default is taken to be port 443. The load balancer for the client port of the Relay service can employ any routing strategy, since all Relay instances are going to serve client connections equally.

Reviewer: Suggestion: give a complete tsh ssh example with a relay specified

This alternate connectivity is beneficial in situations where the client and the resource are known to be close together in a physical or logical sense (the same data center, office, campus, geographical region) and regular connections through the control plane would incur higher latency, lower throughput, or higher costs.

Unlike the Proxy service, the Relay does not host a web UI, intercept connections, impersonate users or provide access to the Teleport control plane API. As such, it's simpler to deploy and keep secure, and it's thus suitable to be deployed even in environments where it wouldn't be possible to securely deploy a Proxy instance.

<Admonition type="warning">

The Teleport Relay service is intended for specific scenarios where clients and agents are in the same network segment and there is a need for connectivity that does not go through the Teleport control plane. It is not a required or recommended cluster component in most Teleport deployments.

</Admonition>

## How it works

> A Relay service deployment consists of one or more Relay instances configured with the same Relay group name, reachable by Teleport agents and clients through a L4 network load balancer. Relay instances of the same group receive connections from agents and clients through the load balancer, and can connect to each other directly. Relay instances listen on two separate ports to serve connections from agents and clients, and a third listening port is used for direct connections from other Relay instances in the same group.

Reviewer 2: >Is that enough of an explanation?

That definitely helps, yes. It's still not totally clear to me what numbered port is the peer port? I guess it doesn't really matter since it's some ephemeral port that isn't known ahead of time, is what I'm gathering?

If that is the case, feel free to resolve this comment.

> The typical setup uses a load balancer serving the two ports, reachable at a single hostname, with port 3042 used by agents and port 443 used by clients, but it's possible to use different load balancers and hostnames for the client and agent ports if necessary. The listening port for connectivity between Relay instances does not make use of the load balancer, since each Relay instance might require connecting to specific other instances to serve connections; as such, the Relay service requires outbound connectivity from each Relay instance to its peers on that port.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The typical setup uses a load balancer serving the two ports, reachable at a single hostname, with port 3042 used by agents and port 443 used by clients. However, it's possible to use different load balancers and hostnames for the client and agent ports if necessary. The listening port for connectivity between Relay instances does not make use of the load balancer, since each Relay instance might require connecting to specific other instances to serve connections; as such, the Relay service requires outbound connectivity from each Relay instance to its peers on that port.
```

/nit break the long sentence up to make it easier to read

When using `tsh`, it's possible to specify the `--relay` option (or the `TELEPORT_RELAY` environment variable) with the hostname and port of the load balancer for the port used by clients; if a port is not specified, the default is taken to be port 443. The load balancer for the client port of the Relay service can employ any routing strategy, since all Relay instances are going to serve client connections equally.

When specifying `--relay` at `tsh login` time, the configured Relay address is stored in the `tsh` profile configuration and will then be used for all later invocations unless overridden. It's possible to configure a default Relay address on a per-user basis in the `default_relay_addr` user trait, which can be directly specified for each [local user](../../zero-trust-access/management/admin/users.mdx), passed by the SSO provider for [SSO users](../../zero-trust-access/sso/sso.mdx), granted through an [Access List](../../identity-governance/access-lists/access-lists.mdx), or added by a [Login Rule](../../zero-trust-access/authentication/login-rules/login-rules.mdx).

> When using `tsh ssh`, if a Relay address was specified at login time or if `--relay` is passed in, the SSH connection will go through the specified Relay rather than going through the control plane. If an address was specified at login time, `--relay=none` will temporarily disable the use of the Relay service, and `--relay=default` will use the default Relay address for the user, even if a different address was specified at login time. When a Relay address is configured, only servers available through the Relay will be accessible, and no connection will go through the control plane.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you specify `--relay` at `tsh login` time, the configured Relay address is saved in your `tsh` profile configuration. This address will be used for all later invocations unless you override it.

You can configure a default Relay address on a per-user basis using the `default_relay_addr` user trait. This trait can be set in several ways:

- Directly for each [local user](../../zero-trust-access/management/admin/users.mdx)
- Passed by the SSO provider for [SSO users](../../zero-trust-access/sso/sso.mdx)
- Granted through an [Access List](../../identity-governance/access-lists/access-lists.mdx)
- Added by a [Login Rule](../../zero-trust-access/authentication/login-rules/login-rules.mdx)

When using `tsh ssh`:

- If a Relay address was specified at login time or if you pass `--relay`, the SSH connection will go through the specified Relay instead of the control plane.
- If an address was specified at login time, you can use `--relay=none` to temporarily disable the Relay service.
- Use `--relay=default` to use the default Relay address for the user, even if a different address was specified at login time.
- When a Relay address is configured, only servers available through the Relay will be accessible. No connection will go through the control plane.
```
/nit

Consider breaking this up into lists or similar to make this section easier to read
